Document new FromSql{Raw,Interpolated} methods (#1673)
aspnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/querying/raw-sql.md

---
# Raw SQL Queries

> Entity Framework Core allows you to drop down to raw SQL queries when working with a relational database. This can be useful if the query you want to perform can't be expressed using LINQ, or if using a LINQ query is resulting in inefficient SQL queries. Raw SQL queries can be used to return any entities that are part of your model, including regular entities and [keyless entitties](xref:core/modeling/query-types).

Author: > I understand entity as the instance and entitytype as the object's type.

I also understand it this way, but I think it makes sense to specify the type here, as we're discussing the type of the type (regular vs. keyless). A bit like how we say that a C# method return value or reference types (and not necessarily value or reference values).

> Entity Framework Core allows you to drop down to raw SQL queries when working with a relational database. This can be useful if the query you want to perform can't be expressed using LINQ, or if using a LINQ query is resulting in inefficient SQL queries. Raw SQL queries can be used to return any entities that are part of your model, including regular entities and [keyless entitties](xref:core/modeling/query-types).

Reviewer: Also renamed page here.

> Entity Framework Core allows you to drop down to raw SQL queries when working with a relational database. This can be useful if the query you want to perform can't be expressed using LINQ, or if using a LINQ query is resulting in inefficient SQL queries. Raw SQL queries can return entity types or, starting with EF Core 2.1, [query types](xref:core/modeling/query-types) that are part of your model.

Author: Will hold off until the query types section itself is modified to keyless entity type (link has to be updated).

> Entity Framework Core allows you to drop down to raw SQL queries when working with a relational database. This can be useful if the query you want to perform can't be expressed using LINQ, or if using a LINQ query is resulting in inefficient SQL queries. Raw SQL queries can return entity types or, starting with EF Core 2.1, [query types](xref:core/modeling/query-types) that are part of your model.

Reviewer: The PR that renames query types to keyless entity types is out.
```suggestion
Entity Framework Core allows you to drop down to raw SQL queries when working with a relational database. This can be useful if the query you want to perform can't be expressed using LINQ, or if using a LINQ query is resulting in inefficient SQL queries. Raw SQL queries can be used to return any entities that are part of your model, including regular entities and [keyless entitties](xref:core/modeling/query-types).
```

> Entity Framework Core allows you to drop down to raw SQL queries when working with a relational database. This can be useful if the query you want to perform can't be expressed using LINQ, or if using a LINQ query is resulting in inefficient SQL queries. Raw SQL queries can return entity types or, starting with EF Core 2.1, [query types](xref:core/modeling/query-types) that are part of your model.

Reviewer: The page also got renamed.

<!-- [!code-csharp[Main](samples/core/Querying/Querying/RawSQL/Sample.cs)] -->
``` csharp
var blogs = context.Blogs
    .FromSqlRaw("EXECUTE dbo.GetMostPopularBlogs")
    .ToList();
```

## Passing parameters

> As with any API that accepts SQL, it is important to parameterize any user input to protect against a SQL injection attack. `FromSqlRaw` performs simple string interpolation, so any parameters will be included as-is and must be manually sanitized; not doing so may expose your application to major security risks. To safely pass parameters, `FromSqlInterpolated` allows you to include placeholders in the SQL query string and then supply parameter values as additional arguments. Any parameter values you supply will automatically be converted to a `DbParameter` for safe execution. Using parameters with `FromSqlRaw` can still useful for dynamically building your SQL query, but should be used with care and never when simple parameterization is needed.

Author: > For me, FromSqlRaw performs not interpolation at all, but still allows you to "use parameters".

I agree that given our naming choice, talking about interpolation in the context of `FromSqlRaw` is not a good idea. However, note that the term "string interpolation" [is used in general](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_interpolation) to refer to any case where a string template is converted to a literal by integrating "interpolatable expressions" into it. [The C# language reference](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/tokens/interpolated) refers to $-strings as interpolated strings, which can be *converted* to FormattableString (but don't have to be). FWIW when we were discussing naming I pointed out that calling the API FromSqlInterpolated isn't ideal, and something like FromSqlParameterized would be more accurate. But that's all in the past - I'll change the text to better fit our naming (and remove the word "parameter" from any context that doesn't include FormattableString).

> [!WARNING]

> > Prior to version 3.0, `FromSqlRaw` and `FromSqlInterpolated` were two overloads named `FromSql`. These two overloads have been obsoleted for safety reasons.

Reviewer: More than including a warning here, can we describe the original `FromSql` under a "using previous versions" subtitle and have a warning explaining briefly in which cases it was ambiguous/hard to predict what things would get parameterized?

Author: Will do.

var user = "johndoe";

var blogs = context.Blogs

>     .FromSqlInterpolated("EXECUTE dbo.GetMostPopularBlogsForUser {0}", user)

Reviewer: Here the correct method is FromSqlRaw.

    .ToList();
```

> This is the same query but using named interpolation syntax:

Reviewer: I am not familiar with the term "named interpolation syntax". Can you provide some references? Otherwise, I suggest:
```suggestion
This is the same query but using string interpolation syntax and the `FromSqlInterpolated` method:
```

<!-- [!code-csharp[Main](samples/core/Querying/Querying/RawSQL/Sample.cs)] -->
``` csharp
var user = "johndoe";

var blogs = context.Blogs
    .FromSqlInterpolated($"EXECUTE dbo.GetMostPopularBlogsForUser {user}")
    .ToList();
```

> You can also construct a DbParameter and supply it as a parameter value. Since a regular SQL parameter placeholder is used, rather than a string placeholder, `FromSqlRaw` can be safely used:

Reviewer: I don't get why this would be considered a reason it is safe to use `FromSqlRaw`.

> var searchTerm = ".NET";

Reviewer 2: Should also show generated SQL since composition.

var blogs = context.Blogs
    .FromSqlInterpolated($"SELECT * FROM dbo.SearchBlogs({searchTerm})")
    .Where(b => b.Rating > 3)
    .OrderByDescending(b => b.Rating)
    .ToList();
```

## Change Tracking

Queries that use the `FromSql` methods follow the exact same change tracking rules as any other LINQ query in EF Core. For example, if the query projects entity types, the results will be tracked by default.

The following example uses a raw SQL query that selects from a Table-Valued Function (TVF), then disables change tracking with the call to `AsNoTracking`:

<!-- [!code-csharp[Main](samples/core/Querying/RawSQL/Sample.cs)] -->
``` csharp
var searchTerm = ".NET";

var blogs = context.Query<SearchBlogsDto>()
    .FromSqlInterpolated($"SELECT * FROM dbo.SearchBlogs({searchTerm})")
    .AsNoTracking()
    .ToList();
```

## Including related data

> The `Include` method can be used to include related data, just like with any other LINQ query:

Reviewer 2: Should also specify that doing Include requires composition to be enabled.

* The SQL query cannot contain related data. However, in many cases you can compose on top of the query using the `Include` operator to return related data (see [Including related data](#including-related-data)).

* `SELECT` statements passed to this method should generally be composable: If EF Core needs to evaluate additional query operators on the server (for example, to translate LINQ operators applied after `FromSql` methods), the supplied SQL will be treated as a subquery. This means that the SQL passed should not contain any characters or options that are not valid on a subquery, such as:
  * A trailing semicolon
  * On SQL Server, a trailing query-level hint (for example, `OPTION (HASH JOIN)`)
  * On SQL Server, an `ORDER BY` clause that is not accompanied of `OFFSET 0` OR `TOP 100 PERCENT` in the `SELECT` clause

* Note that SQL Server does not allow composing over stored procedure calls, so any attempt to apply additional query operators to such a call will result in invalid SQL. Query operators may be introduced after `AsEnumerable()` for client evaluation.

# Previous versions

> EF Core version 2.2 and earlier had two overloads named `FromSql` which behaved in the same way as the newer `FromSqlRaw` and `FromSqlInterpolated`. This made it very easy to accidentally call the raw string method when the intent was to call the interpolated string method, and the other way around. This could result in queries not being parameterized when they should have been.

Author: I've included this relatively short note. @divega do you think this is sufficient or would you like to see examples of possible mistakes? I'm not sure the history/reasoning is relevant here.

Reviewer: I personally like it like this. Thanks.

* The SQL query cannot contain related data. However, in many cases you can compose on top of the query using the `Include` operator to return related data (see [Including related data](#including-related-data)).

> * `SELECT` statements passed to this method should generally be composable: If EF Core needs to evaluate additional query operators on the server (for example, to translate LINQ operators applied after `FromSql` methods), the supplied SQL will be treated as a subquery. This means that the SQL passed should not contain any characters or options that are not valid on a subquery, such as:

Reviewer 2: Line 137: The SQL query must return data for all properties of the entity or query type.

no query types

  * a trailing semicolon
  * On SQL Server, a trailing query-level hint (for example, `OPTION (HASH JOIN)`)
  * On SQL Server, an `ORDER BY` clause that is not accompanied of `OFFSET 0` OR `TOP 100 PERCENT` in the `SELECT` clause

> * SQL statements other than `SELECT` are recognized automatically as non-composable. As a consequence, the full results of stored procedures are always returned to the client and any LINQ operators applied after `FromSql` methods are evaluated in-memory.

Reviewer: AFAIR, the plan was that in 3.0 we were going to remove any heuristics to try to distinguish composable from non-composable queries. The latter should lead to incorrect SQL now. Did this plan change? 

cc @smitpatel

Reviewer: The warning here is an important security note for EF Core. Why remove it? I think we should consider moving it to the top of the page instead, after making any adjustments necessary to it.

Reviewer 2: The plan did not changed. The statement is wrong.

Author: Sorry. Have replaced the composability comment with one specifically addressing SQL Server stored procedures and client evaluation.

Author: > The warning here is an important security note for EF Core. Why remove it? I think we should consider moving it to the top of the page instead, after making any adjustments necessary to it.

Have brought the warning back, updated it and moved it to the top of the "Passing Parameters" section.
